hello I'm G guruthi we begin in the hag
where judges at the international court
of justice that's the United Nations Top
Court have just ruled that Israel must
immediately halt its military offensive
and other actions in Rafa citing the
immediate risk to the Palestinian people
it also ruled that Hamas must
immediately and unconditionally release
its hostages let's listen to what the
judge who was speaking in the past half
an hour had to say the court recalls
that in ordance with article 75
paragraph 2 of its rules when a request
for the indication of provisional
measures has been made it has the power
under its statute to indicate measures
that are not in whole or in part other
than those
requested in the present case having
considered the terms of the provisional
measures requested by South Africa and
the circumstances of the case the court
found that the measures to be indicated
need not be identical to those
requested the court considered that in
Conformity with obligations under the
genocide convention Israel must
immediately hold its military offensive
and any other action in the Rafa
Governor which may inflict on the
Palestinian group in Gaza conditions of
life that could bring about its physical
destruction in whole or in part
the court records that it that in its
order of January 26
2024 it ordered Israel inter area to I
quote take effective measures to prevent
the destruction and ensure the
preservation of evidence related to
allegations of Acts within the scope of
Article 2 and article 3 of the genocide
convention end of
quote in the present
circumstances the court is also of The
View that in order to preserve evidence
related to allegations of Acts falling
within the scope of Article 2 and
article 3 of the genocide convention
Israel must take effective measures to
ensure the unimpeded access to the Gaza
Strip of any Commission of inquiry fact
finding Mission or ever investigative
body mandated by competent organs of the
United ations to investigate allegations
of
genocide the judge there the icj just to
give you some initial responses uh David
Mera spokesperson for the Israeli
government has said there is no power in
the world that will push us to commit a
public suicide because that's what this
is to stop our war against Hamas that's
repeating a line that of course a
consistent line that we've heard from
the Israeli government who I think are
meeting now there was a call for Mr
Netanyahu to meet um his top ministers
and Hamas um as reported by the Reuters
news agency has said that they welcome
the icj plan to send the investigation
committee into Gaza they say they would
promise any cooperation that they can
give um and they have said that they
welcome the decision on Rafa saying it
doesn't go far enough it's urging an end
for Israel's offensive on all of Gaza
and looking at uh whether the security
Council will now look to try and
implement this ruling well let's get
more now our diplomatic correspondent
Paul Adams is in Jerusalem and he told
us more about the immediate reaction
there in Israel if this was the The
Measure that was
anticipated uh uh with some debate as to
whether or not the court would finally
uh take that additional step uh no uh
reaction official reaction from the
government so far it's due to discuss
this ruling uh later today uh there is a
reaction from the Hardline Finance
Minister uh itar benav who has called it
irrelevant and ant and he's dismissed
the court as anti-semitic these are the
sorts of remarks you would expect to
hear from some of Mr netanyahu's more
Hardline colleagues uh but when it comes
to uh the order to uh to Halt the rough
or offensive I think we can expect uh a
big fat no from the government here uh
and I think they will probably complain
that the court uh in coming to its
conclusions only cited what the the UN
had told them about the situation uh in
southern Gaza the Israelis have been
arguing for some time that they are
taking steps not withstanding their
military operation in Gaza that they are
taking steps to improve the provision of
food and goods into the Gaza Strip it's
very noticeable for example that for the
three weeks or so after uh after May the
7th when the order to uh to launch the
offensive in
began only about 140 trucks of un Aid
entered through the Karen Shalom
crossing the most important crossing
point from Israel but and this was
something the court did not refer to
hundreds and hundreds and hundreds of
trucks of commercial uh food stuffs have
gone in through that very same route
allowed in by Israel escorted by uh
armed guards inside the Gaza Strip and
taken into the the marketplace in Gaza
there is food to be had in places a lot
of gazans can't afford it but that was
an element of Israel's response to uh
the situation uh in Gaza that the court
uh simply didn't allude to they also
obviously did not allude to Israel's
military rationale for attacking Gaza
the complete dismantling of the last uh
remaining battalions of Hamas and the
importance Israel would say of securing
the the border between Gaza and Egypt to
prevent the smuggling of weapons uh
which could lead to a future conflict
now all of this was was was was not
referred to by the court the court
obviously feels that of in excess of
800,000 people we think it's probably
closer to a million by now uh is
evidence of the increased risk uh to
life and and well-being of a huge
portion of the Palestinian population of
the Gaza Strip and that was enough to
persuade those judges who had not been
persuaded so far to say enough is enough
this operation has to stop Paul Adams
there speaking to us a bit earlier uh
from Jerusalem and just to let you know
that since we SP Paul um David mener
who's a spokesperson for the Israeli
government um did give some reaction to
the news uh to the BBC and he said there
is no power in the world that will push
us to commit a public suicide because
that's what this is to stop our war
against Hamas uh we understand the
Israeli government are meeting or going
to be meeting soon to discuss this
ruling uh We've also had reports on
Reuters of Hamas reaction Hamas
apparently calling on the UN Security
Council to implement the icj court of
justice decision welcoming the ruling
and uh welcoming the call for an
investigation an inquiry saying that
they would cooperate with that also
we've had a response from the
Palestinian authorities saying they
welcome the decision as again reported
by Reuters um news agency saying that it
represents an international consensus to
end the war on the Gaza Strip um
according to a Palestinian presidential
spokesperson we will keep you across all
the reaction of course we're going to be
looking to the US to see uh what the
White House say whether this has any
impact on Biden's current position of
ongoing support for Israel though of
course he has warned repeatedly uh the
Israeli leadership not to go into uh
Hamas uh territory uh in Rafa uh because
of the risk to civilian life we will
keep you across those events